Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
respiratory acid-base and the integrated control of ventilation.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us discuss acid-base balance. Begin with the importance of hydrogen ion
regulation and how it is expressed.
The regulation of the hydrogen ion concentration of the body fluids is one of the
most tightly controlled of all physiological variables,
because the hydrogen ion concentration profoundly affects the structure and
function of proteins, and so of enzymes, ion channels and receptors,
throughout the body, and life is compatible only with a narrow range.
The hydrogen ion concentration of the arterial blood is held very low and very
constant, around forty nanomoles per litre,
and because this is so small a number and varies over a wide range,
it is conventionally expressed as its negative logarithm, the pH,
which is correspondingly around seven point four, the normal range being narrow,
about seven point three five to seven point four five.
A pH below this range is an acidaemia, above it an alkalaemia;
the processes tending to produce them are acidosis and alkalosis.
The body defends the pH against the continuous production of acid by metabolism
through three lines of defence operating over different timescales: the buffers,
the respiratory system, and the kidneys.
So the hydrogen ion concentration is tightly regulated because it affects all
proteins and so cellular function; it is normally around forty nanomoles per litre,
expressed as a pH of about seven point four over a narrow range,
with acidaemia below and alkalaemia above;
defended against metabolic acid by the buffers,
the lungs and the kidneys — a regulation fundamental to function.
Describe the bicarbonate buffer system and the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation.
The bicarbonate system is the most important buffer of the extracellular fluid,
and its behaviour is described by the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation,
which relates the pH to the components of the system, expressed entirely in words.
A buffer resists changes in pH; the bicarbonate buffer consists of the weak acid,
carbonic acid — in equilibrium with dissolved carbon dioxide — and its conjugate
base, bicarbonate.
Its special importance, despite not being the strongest buffer,
lies in its being an open system, both components being independently regulated:
the carbon dioxide by the lungs and the bicarbonate by the kidneys.
The Henderson-Hasselbalch equation, in words,
states that the pH equals a constant — the dissociation constant of the system —
plus the logarithm of the ratio of the bicarbonate concentration to the
concentration of dissolved carbon dioxide,
the latter being the carbon dioxide tension times its solubility.
The key insight is that the pH depends on the ratio of bicarbonate to carbon
dioxide, not on their absolute amounts;
so the pH is set by the balance between the renally-regulated bicarbonate and the
respiratory-regulated carbon dioxide.
So the bicarbonate buffer, of carbonic acid and bicarbonate,
is the chief extracellular buffer and an open system regulated by lungs and
kidneys; the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation states that the pH equals a constant
plus the log of the ratio of bicarbonate to dissolved carbon dioxide — so the pH
depends on the ratio of the renally-controlled bicarbonate to the
respiratory-controlled carbon dioxide, the basis of acid-base regulation.
Describe the body's buffer systems.
The buffers are the first and most immediate line of defence of the pH,
acting within seconds to minimise the change in hydrogen ion concentration when
acid or base is added, and the body has several, in the blood and within the cells.
In the extracellular fluid, the bicarbonate system is the most important,
for the reasons given — chiefly that it is an open system,
regulated by the lungs and kidneys. The plasma proteins provide some buffering.
Within the red cells, haemoglobin is a particularly important buffer,
well suited to buffering the carbon dioxide-derived acid carried in the blood,
its buffering aided by the change in its affinity on deoxygenation.
The phosphate system buffers in the cells and in the urine.
The largest reservoir of buffering, over a longer period,
is within the cells and in the bone,
which can take up or release hydrogen ions and exchange them for other ions.
The different buffers are in equilibrium with one another through the common
hydrogen ion concentration — the isohydric principle — so measuring one reflects
all.
So the body's buffers — acting within seconds — are, in the extracellular fluid,
the dominant bicarbonate system, with plasma proteins; in the red cells,
haemoglobin and phosphate; and, over longer periods,
the large intracellular and bony stores;
all in equilibrium through the common hydrogen ion concentration — the immediate
defence of the pH against added acid or base.
Describe the respiratory and renal regulation of acid-base balance.
Beyond the immediate buffering, the pH is regulated by the lungs and the kidneys,
the two organs that control the two components of the bicarbonate system,
acting over different timescales as the second and third lines of defence.
The respiratory regulation is rapid, operating within minutes:
the lungs control the carbon dioxide, and so the acid component,
through ventilation.
A fall in pH — an acidosis — stimulates the chemoreceptors to increase ventilation,
blowing off carbon dioxide and so raising the pH back towards normal;
a rise in pH reduces ventilation, retaining carbon dioxide.
This respiratory compensation is powerful and quick, but limited,
since it cannot fully correct and is constrained by the need to oxygenate.
The renal regulation is slow, operating over hours to days,
but is the only means of excreting fixed,
non-volatile acid and of finally restoring the pH:
the kidneys excrete hydrogen ions, reclaim and generate bicarbonate,
and so adjust the bicarbonate component.
In a respiratory disturbance the kidneys compensate by adjusting bicarbonate;
in a metabolic disturbance the lungs compensate by adjusting carbon dioxide.
So the lungs regulate acid-base rapidly, within minutes,
by controlling carbon dioxide through ventilation — powerful but limited;
and the kidneys regulate it slowly, over hours to days,
by excreting acid and adjusting bicarbonate — the only route for fixed acid;
the two compensating for disturbances of the other,
completing the defence of the pH.
Describe the primary acid-base disorders.
The primary disturbances of acid-base balance are classified into four types,
according to whether the primary problem is in the respiratory component — the
carbon dioxide — or the metabolic component — the bicarbonate — and whether it
tends to acidaemia or alkalaemia, following directly from the Henderson-Hasselbalch
relationship.
A respiratory acidosis is a primary rise in the carbon dioxide,
from hypoventilation — reduced ventilation relative to production — lowering the
ratio of bicarbonate to carbon dioxide and so the pH.
A respiratory alkalosis is a primary fall in carbon dioxide, from hyperventilation,
raising the pH.
A metabolic acidosis is a primary fall in bicarbonate,
either from the addition of fixed acid that consumes it — as in lactic acidosis,
ketoacidosis or renal failure — or from its direct loss, as in diarrhoea;
the fall in bicarbonate lowers the ratio and the pH.
A metabolic alkalosis is a primary rise in bicarbonate, from loss of acid,
as in vomiting, or from bicarbonate gain. Each primary disorder provokes a
compensatory response in the other component,
tending to restore the ratio and the pH towards normal.
So the four primary acid-base disorders are respiratory acidosis — a primary rise
in carbon dioxide; respiratory alkalosis — a primary fall in carbon dioxide;
metabolic acidosis — a primary fall in bicarbonate from added acid or its loss;
and metabolic alkalosis — a primary rise in bicarbonate;
each lowering or raising the pH through the bicarbonate-to-carbon-dioxide ratio,
and each provoking compensation in the other component.
Describe how acid-base disorders are quantified and compensated.
To interpret acid-base disturbances,
we need measures of the metabolic component independent of the respiratory,
and an understanding of compensation,
so that a disorder and its compensation can be distinguished,
and any added disorder identified.
The metabolic component is quantified in two main ways.
The standard bicarbonate is the bicarbonate concentration corrected to a standard
carbon dioxide, removing the respiratory influence.
The base excess is the amount of acid or base that would have to be added to return
the blood to a normal pH at a normal carbon dioxide — a positive base excess
indicating a metabolic alkalosis or base gain, a negative base excess,
or base deficit, indicating a metabolic acidosis.
Compensation is the secondary change in the other component that tends to restore
the pH: in a metabolic acidosis, the respiratory compensation is hyperventilation,
lowering the carbon dioxide; in a respiratory acidosis,
the renal compensation is a rise in bicarbonate.
Compensation moves the pH towards, but not fully to, normal,
and is predictable in degree, so a deviation from the expected suggests a second,
mixed disorder. The anion gap helps classify a metabolic acidosis.
So acid-base disorders are quantified by the standard bicarbonate and the base
excess, which isolate the metabolic component;
and compensation — respiratory for metabolic disorders,
renal for respiratory — partially restores the pH in a predictable degree,
deviations indicating a mixed disorder,
with the anion gap classifying metabolic acidosis — the tools of acid-base
interpretation.
Pull it together: how is the body's pH defended,
and how does this integrate with the control of ventilation?
I would draw the respiratory module to a close around the defence of the pH as an
integrated system in which the control of ventilation plays a central part,
linking respiratory physiology to acid-base balance.
The pH, set by the ratio of bicarbonate to carbon dioxide,
is defended in three lines: the buffers, instantly; the lungs, within minutes,
by adjusting the carbon dioxide through ventilation; and the kidneys, over days,
by adjusting the bicarbonate and excreting fixed acid.
The respiratory contribution is intimately tied to the control of breathing we have
studied: the chemoreceptors sense the carbon dioxide and the pH,
and adjust ventilation to defend them — so that the same chemical control that
holds the carbon dioxide constant also serves acid-base regulation,
hyperventilating to compensate a metabolic acidosis, for instance.
Thus the carbon dioxide is both the principal product regulated by ventilation and
the principal respiratory determinant of pH,
and the control of ventilation is simultaneously the control of one half of the
acid-base balance.
So the body's pH is defended by buffers, the lungs and the kidneys,
set by the bicarbonate-to-carbon-dioxide ratio;
the respiratory contribution is the chemoreceptor-driven control of ventilation,
which adjusts carbon dioxide to defend both the blood gases and the pH —
integrating the control of breathing with acid-base regulation,
a fitting synthesis of respiratory physiology.
Describe the anion gap and its use in classifying a metabolic acidosis.
The anion gap is a calculated quantity used to classify a metabolic acidosis
according to its cause, by detecting the presence of unmeasured anions,
and it is a valuable tool in narrowing the differential diagnosis.
The principle rests on electroneutrality:
the total positive and negative charges in the plasma must balance,
but not all ions are routinely measured.
The anion gap is calculated as the difference between the commonly measured cation,
sodium — sometimes with potassium — and the commonly measured anions,
chloride and bicarbonate; the resulting gap represents the unmeasured anions,
normally a modest value made up chiefly of the negative charge on plasma proteins.
In a metabolic acidosis, the use of the gap is to distinguish two mechanisms.
If the acidosis is due to the addition of a fixed acid — such as lactate,
the ketoacids, or the acids of renal failure and certain poisonings — the acid's
anion is unmeasured, so the gap widens: a high-anion-gap metabolic acidosis.
If the acidosis is due to a loss of bicarbonate — as in diarrhoea or renal tubular
acidosis — chloride is retained to maintain electroneutrality,
so the gap is normal: a normal-anion-gap, or hyperchloraemic, acidosis.
So the anion gap, the difference between measured cations and measured anions,
reflects the unmeasured anions; in a metabolic acidosis a widened gap indicates
added fixed acid — lactate, ketoacids,
renal failure — while a normal gap indicates bicarbonate loss with chloride
retention, as in diarrhoea — a calculation classifying the acidosis and directing
the search for its cause.
Describe lactic acidosis.
Lactic acidosis is the most important cause of a high-anion-gap metabolic acidosis
in the acutely ill, arising from the accumulation of lactic acid,
and it is both a marker of tissue hypoxia and, sometimes,
a consequence of other disturbances.
Lactate is produced by anaerobic glycolysis:
when the supply of oxygen to a tissue is insufficient for its metabolic needs,
the cells cannot fully oxidise glucose and instead produce lactic acid,
which dissociates to lactate and hydrogen ions, lowering the pH.
It is classically divided into two types.
Type A, the commoner and more serious,
is due to tissue hypoxia from inadequate oxygen delivery — as in shock of any
cause, severe hypoxaemia or anaemia, or regional ischaemia;
the raised lactate reflects the inadequacy of oxygen delivery and is a marker of
the severity of shock and of the response to resuscitation.
Type B is due to causes other than overt tissue hypoxia — such as certain drugs and
toxins, liver disease impairing lactate clearance, and some metabolic disorders.
The treatment is of the underlying cause,
chiefly the restoration of oxygen delivery.
So lactic acidosis is a high-anion-gap acidosis from the accumulation of lactic
acid produced by anaerobic glycolysis; type A,
from tissue hypoxia due to inadequate oxygen delivery as in shock,
is a key marker of severity and of resuscitation, while type B arises from drugs,
liver disease and metabolic disorders — its management being the correction of the
cause, especially oxygen delivery.
Describe the base excess and the standard base excess.
The base excess is a derived measure that quantifies the metabolic component of an
acid-base disturbance independently of the respiratory component,
and it is widely used because it expresses, in a single number,
the degree of metabolic acidosis or alkalosis.
It is defined as the amount of strong acid, or base,
that would have to be added to a sample of blood to restore its pH to the normal
value of seven point four, at a standard carbon dioxide tension and temperature.
By specifying the standard carbon dioxide,
the measure removes the respiratory influence,
so the base excess reflects only the metabolic, or non-respiratory, component.
A positive base excess — an excess of base — indicates a metabolic alkalosis or a
compensated respiratory acidosis; a negative base excess,
also called a base deficit, indicates a metabolic acidosis or a compensated
respiratory alkalosis.
The standard base excess is a refinement:
it is calculated for the whole extracellular fluid rather than just the blood,
by allowing for the lower haemoglobin of the extracellular fluid as a whole,
which gives a more accurate reflection of the metabolic disturbance of the body in
vivo.
So the base excess is the acid or base needed to restore the blood pH to seven
point four at a standard carbon dioxide,
isolating the metabolic component — positive in metabolic alkalosis, negative,
a base deficit, in metabolic acidosis;
and the standard base excess refines this for the whole extracellular fluid,
giving a single, respiration-independent measure of the metabolic disturbance.
Describe the expected compensation for the primary acid-base disorders.
Each primary acid-base disorder provokes a compensatory response in the other
component, and because the degree of this compensation is predictable,
comparing the observed with the expected compensation allows a mixed disorder to be
detected — a key step in interpretation.
The principles are these.
A metabolic acidosis is compensated by hyperventilation,
the respiratory system lowering the carbon dioxide; this compensation is rapid,
occurring over hours, and the expected fall in carbon dioxide for a given fall in
bicarbonate can be estimated by simple rules.
A metabolic alkalosis is compensated by hypoventilation,
raising the carbon dioxide, though this is limited by the need to maintain
oxygenation.
A respiratory acidosis is compensated by the kidney retaining bicarbonate;
this is slow, taking two to three days to become complete,
so the compensation is small in an acute respiratory acidosis but substantial in a
chronic one.
A respiratory alkalosis is compensated by the kidney excreting bicarbonate,
again over days.
Importantly, compensation moves the pH towards normal but does not fully correct
it, and never overcorrects; so a pH that is normal,
or that has moved the wrong way, or a compensation outside the expected range,
indicates a second, mixed disorder.
So each disorder is compensated predictably — metabolic disorders rapidly by the
respiratory adjustment of carbon dioxide, respiratory disorders slowly, over days,
by the renal adjustment of bicarbonate — the compensation partially restoring but
not overcorrecting the pH; so a deviation from the expected compensation reveals a
mixed disorder, the basis of systematic acid-base interpretation.
Describe temperature effects on acid-base balance,
and the alpha-stat and pH-stat approaches.
Temperature affects the acid-base state of the blood,
which raises the question of how to manage acid-base during hypothermia,
as in cardiac surgery, and the two approaches — alpha-stat and pH-stat — represent
different philosophies, a point of some controversy.
The effect of temperature is that, as blood is cooled,
the solubility of carbon dioxide rises and the dissociation of water changes,
so that the carbon dioxide tension falls and the pH rises;
thus the same blood has a different measured pH and carbon dioxide at different
temperatures.
Blood gases are measured by the analyser at thirty-seven degrees,
so a decision must be made about how to interpret and manage them in a hypothermic
patient.
The alpha-stat approach manages the blood gases as measured at thirty-seven
degrees, without correcting for the patient's actual temperature;
this maintains the constancy of the charge state of proteins — the alpha referring
to the imidazole groups of histidine — preserving enzyme function,
and is the approach generally favoured in adults.
The pH-stat approach corrects the values to the patient's actual temperature and
aims to keep the temperature-corrected pH normal,
which requires adding carbon dioxide; it increases cerebral blood flow,
and is used in some settings such as paediatric cardiac surgery.
So cooling blood lowers its carbon dioxide tension and raises its pH;
the alpha-stat approach manages the gases as measured at thirty-seven degrees,
preserving protein charge and enzyme function,
while the pH-stat approach corrects to the patient's temperature,
adding carbon dioxide and raising cerebral blood flow — two philosophies of
acid-base management in hypothermia, with alpha-stat generally favoured in adults.
Outline a systematic approach to interpreting an arterial blood gas.
A systematic approach to the arterial blood gas allows the acid-base disturbance to
be identified and its cause and compensation worked out,
and applying the principles we have discussed in a set order avoids error.
I would proceed in steps.
First, look at the oxygenation — the arterial oxygen and the inspired oxygen — to
assess for hypoxaemia, separately from the acid-base.
Second, look at the pH: is there an acidaemia or an alkalaemia,
and so which way is the primary disturbance.
Third, examine the carbon dioxide and the bicarbonate, or base excess,
to determine whether the disturbance is respiratory — the carbon dioxide moved in
the direction to explain the pH — or metabolic — the bicarbonate or base excess
moved to explain it.
Fourth, assess the compensation: is the other component changed in the expected
direction and degree; a compensation outside the expected range,
or a normal pH with both components deranged, indicates a mixed disorder.
Fifth, if there is a metabolic acidosis, calculate the anion gap to classify it,
and seek the cause. Finally, interpret the whole in the clinical context.
So the arterial blood gas is interpreted systematically: assess oxygenation;
identify acidaemia or alkalaemia from the pH;
determine whether the primary disorder is respiratory or metabolic from the carbon
dioxide and bicarbonate; check whether compensation is as expected,
a deviation indicating a mixed disorder;
calculate the anion gap for a metabolic acidosis;
and interpret in context — a stepwise method applying acid-base physiology to the
diagnosis at the bedside.
Describe the Stewart, or physicochemical, approach to acid-base balance in brief.
The Stewart approach, also called the physicochemical or strong-ion approach,
is an alternative way of analysing acid-base balance that,
rather than treating bicarbonate as the central variable,
identifies the truly independent determinants of the hydrogen ion concentration,
and although more complex, it offers insights into certain disturbances.
The traditional bicarbonate-centred approach treats the bicarbonate and carbon
dioxide as the determinants of pH; the Stewart approach argues that the hydrogen
ion and bicarbonate concentrations are themselves dependent variables,
determined by three independent variables.
These are: the carbon dioxide tension, set by ventilation;
the strong ion difference, which is the difference between the concentrations of
the strong, fully-dissociated cations — chiefly sodium — and strong anions —
chiefly chloride; and the total concentration of weak acids,
chiefly albumin and phosphate.
According to this approach, the pH changes only when one of these three changes;
so, for example, a change in chloride relative to sodium — altering the strong ion
difference — is the real cause of certain acidoses,
such as the hyperchloraemic acidosis of large saline infusions,
which the traditional approach attributes to dilution.
So the Stewart approach identifies three independent determinants of pH — the
carbon dioxide, the strong ion difference,
and the total weak acid — with bicarbonate and hydrogen ion as dependent variables;
it explains certain disturbances, such as the hyperchloraemic acidosis of saline
infusion, in terms of the strong ion difference — a more complex but illuminating
alternative to the traditional bicarbonate-centred analysis.
Describe the physiological effects of acidosis and alkalosis on the body.
Disturbances of the pH have widespread effects on the body,
because the hydrogen ion concentration affects so many proteins and processes,
and these effects are important in the acidotic or alkalotic patient under
anaesthesia.
Acidaemia has these effects: on the cardiovascular system,
a severe acidosis depresses myocardial contractility and predisposes to
arrhythmias, and, while it causes some vasodilatation,
it blunts the response to catecholamines, so the circulation may fail;
on the respiratory system, it stimulates ventilation as compensation;
it shifts the oxygen dissociation curve to the right, aiding unloading;
it causes hyperkalaemia, as potassium moves out of cells in exchange for hydrogen
ions; and at severe levels it depresses the central nervous system.
Alkalaemia has largely opposite and other effects:
it shifts the dissociation curve to the left, impairing oxygen unloading;
it causes hypokalaemia and lowers the ionised calcium,
causing neuromuscular irritability and tetany;
it causes cerebral and coronary vasoconstriction; and it depresses ventilation.
So acidaemia depresses the myocardium and blunts the catecholamine response,
causes hyperkalaemia, shifts the dissociation curve right,
and depresses the central nervous system when severe;
while alkalaemia shifts the curve left,
causes hypokalaemia and reduced ionised calcium with tetany,
and causes vasoconstriction — widespread effects making the correction of pH
disturbances important, particularly in the anaesthetised and critically ill
patient.
Describe the Davenport diagram.
The Davenport diagram is a graphical representation of the acid-base state of the
blood that displays the relationships between the pH,
the bicarbonate and the carbon dioxide,
and it is a useful way of visualising acid-base disturbances and their compensation.
The diagram is plotted with the plasma bicarbonate concentration on the vertical
axis against the pH on the horizontal axis.
Across this plane run two families of lines.
First, curved lines, each representing a constant carbon dioxide tension — the
carbon dioxide isobars — showing the combinations of pH and bicarbonate at that
carbon dioxide.
Second, the buffer line, the line along which the blood moves as carbon dioxide is
added or removed at constant metabolic state,
its slope set by the non-bicarbonate buffering of the blood.
The normal point lies at a pH of seven point four and a bicarbonate of twenty-four.
The different acid-base disturbances move the point in characteristic directions:
a respiratory acidosis moves it along the buffer line to a lower pH and higher
bicarbonate; a metabolic acidosis to a lower pH and lower bicarbonate; and so on,
with compensation moving it further in a defined way.
So the Davenport diagram plots bicarbonate against pH,
crossed by the carbon dioxide isobars and the buffer line;
the normal point and the characteristic directions of movement for respiratory and
metabolic acidosis and alkalosis, and their compensation,
allow the acid-base state and its disturbances to be visualised — a graphical tool
for understanding acid-base balance.
Describe metabolic alkalosis and how it is maintained.
Metabolic alkalosis is a primary rise in the plasma bicarbonate raising the pH,
and an interesting feature is that,
because the kidney is normally very capable of excreting excess bicarbonate,
a metabolic alkalosis can only persist if something maintains it,
so its analysis requires considering both its generation and its maintenance.
The generation of a metabolic alkalosis occurs by the loss of acid or the gain of
bicarbonate: the commonest cause is the loss of acid,
as in vomiting or nasogastric suction,
which loses hydrochloric acid from the stomach; or the renal loss of acid,
as with diuretics or mineralocorticoid excess; less commonly,
the administration of bicarbonate or its precursors.
Now, the kidney would normally excrete the excess bicarbonate and correct the
alkalosis; so for the alkalosis to be maintained,
the kidney must be prevented from doing so.
The usual maintaining factors are a depletion of chloride and of the extracellular
volume, and potassium depletion, which cause the kidney to retain bicarbonate — so
the alkalosis persists until the chloride, volume and potassium are restored,
which is why such alkaloses are called chloride-responsive and are treated with
saline.
So metabolic alkalosis is a primary rise in bicarbonate,
generated by acid loss — as in vomiting — or bicarbonate gain;
but because the kidney can normally excrete bicarbonate,
it is maintained only by factors that make the kidney retain it — chiefly chloride
and volume depletion and potassium depletion — so it persists until these are
corrected, typically with saline, hence chloride-responsive — a disturbance
requiring attention to both generation and maintenance.
Describe the acid-base disturbance of diabetic ketoacidosis.
Diabetic ketoacidosis is an important and instructive cause of a high-anion-gap
metabolic acidosis, arising from the metabolic consequences of insulin deficiency,
and its acid-base disturbance illustrates several principles.
In the absence of sufficient insulin,
with an excess of the counter-regulatory hormones,
the body cannot use glucose and instead breaks down fat,
producing large amounts of the ketoacids — acetoacetic and beta-hydroxybutyric
acids.
These are fixed acids, so they consume bicarbonate and add unmeasured anions,
producing a high-anion-gap metabolic acidosis, often severe.
The body compensates by hyperventilation,
the deep Kussmaul breathing lowering the carbon dioxide to raise the pH.
There are accompanying disturbances:
an osmotic diuresis from the hyperglycaemia causes profound dehydration and
electrolyte loss; the total body potassium is depleted,
though the serum potassium may initially be normal or high because the acidosis and
insulin lack shift potassium out of the cells — a crucial point,
since giving insulin and correcting the acidosis drives potassium back into the
cells and can cause a dangerous hypokalaemia.
Treatment is with fluid, insulin and careful potassium replacement.
So diabetic ketoacidosis is a high-anion-gap metabolic acidosis from the
overproduction of ketoacids in insulin deficiency,
compensated by Kussmaul hyperventilation,
with dehydration and a depleted total-body potassium that is masked initially and
falls dangerously on treatment — an acidosis whose management must anticipate the
potassium shift, illustrating the integration of acid-base and electrolyte balance.
Describe the interaction between potassium and acid-base balance.
There is an important and clinically significant interaction between the plasma
potassium and the acid-base state, because hydrogen and potassium ions are
exchanged across cell membranes, so that disturbances of one affect the other,
a relationship the anaesthetist must keep in mind.
The basis is that, to maintain electroneutrality,
hydrogen and potassium ions shift between the cells and the extracellular fluid in
the same direction relative to the cell.
In an acidosis, the excess extracellular hydrogen ions move into the cells to be
buffered, and to maintain electroneutrality potassium moves out of the cells into
the plasma, raising the plasma potassium — so an acidosis tends to cause
hyperkalaemia.
Conversely, an alkalosis drives potassium into the cells, causing hypokalaemia.
The effect works the other way too: changes in potassium affect the acid-base state.
The clinical importance is considerable:
a measured potassium must be interpreted in the light of the pH — a normal
potassium in an acidotic patient may conceal a depleted total body potassium,
which will fall as the acidosis is corrected,
as in the treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis.
So potassium and acid-base balance interact through the exchange of hydrogen and
potassium ions across cell membranes: acidosis drives potassium out of cells,
causing hyperkalaemia, and alkalosis drives it in, causing hypokalaemia;
so the potassium must be interpreted in the light of the pH,
an acidosis potentially masking a total-body potassium depletion — an interaction
of major importance in clinical and anaesthetic practice.
Describe the hyperchloraemic acidosis associated with saline administration.
The infusion of large volumes of normal saline can cause a metabolic acidosis,
a normal-anion-gap, hyperchloraemic acidosis,
and understanding it illustrates the influence of chloride on acid-base balance,
best explained by the strong-ion approach.
Normal saline contains equal concentrations of sodium and chloride,
the chloride concentration being considerably higher than that of the plasma.
When a large volume is infused, the plasma chloride rises disproportionately
relative to the sodium.
By the traditional view, this is a dilutional and hyperchloraemic acidosis;
by the Stewart, strong-ion view, the explanation is clearer:
the acid-base state depends on the strong ion difference — the difference between
the strong cations, chiefly sodium, and strong anions,
chiefly chloride — and raising the chloride relative to the sodium narrows the
strong ion difference, which, by the physicochemical relationships, lowers the pH,
producing the acidosis.
The anion gap is normal, since the added anion, chloride, is measured.
This is avoided by using balanced salt solutions,
whose composition is closer to that of plasma,
with a lower chloride and some bicarbonate precursor.
So large-volume normal saline causes a hyperchloraemic,
normal-anion-gap metabolic acidosis by raising the plasma chloride relative to
sodium, narrowing the strong ion difference and so lowering the pH,
as the strong-ion approach explains;
avoided by using balanced solutions closer to plasma in composition — a disturbance
of practical importance in fluid therapy,
illustrating the role of chloride in acid-base balance.
Describe the recognition of mixed acid-base disorders.
A mixed acid-base disorder is the presence of more than one primary disturbance at
the same time, and recognising them is important because they may be missed if the
analysis assumes a single disorder,
and they can produce dangerous or deceptively normal values.
The key to recognising them is the principle that compensation for a single primary
disorder is predictable in direction and degree, and never overcorrects the pH;
so a deviation from the expected pattern signals a second, independent disorder.
Several clues point to a mixed disorder. A pH that is normal, or near normal,
while both the carbon dioxide and the bicarbonate are markedly deranged,
suggests opposing disorders — for example a combined respiratory and metabolic
acidosis and alkalosis.
A compensation that is greater or less than expected for the primary disorder
indicates an added disturbance — for instance,
a metabolic acidosis in which the carbon dioxide has fallen more than the expected
respiratory compensation indicates an added respiratory alkalosis.
An unexpected change in the pH — in the wrong direction — indicates a second
dominant disorder. The anion gap and the clinical context help.
Examples include the patient with both a respiratory and a metabolic acidosis,
as in a cardiac arrest, a dangerous combination.
So mixed acid-base disorders are recognised by deviations from the predictable
single-disorder compensation: a near-normal pH with both components deranged,
a compensation greater or less than expected, or a pH moving the wrong way;
with the anion gap and clinical context — their recognition essential to avoid
missing dangerous or deceptive combined disturbances.
Describe the changes in acid-base balance during pregnancy.
Pregnancy produces a characteristic alteration in the acid-base balance,
a compensated respiratory alkalosis,
which results from the effect of progesterone on ventilation,
and which is important to recognise in the interpretation of the blood gases of the
pregnant patient.
The driving change is an increase in ventilation: progesterone,
which rises in pregnancy, stimulates the respiratory centre and increases its
sensitivity to carbon dioxide, so the alveolar ventilation increases,
by around a half by term, beyond the modest rise in carbon dioxide production.
This hyperventilation lowers the arterial carbon dioxide,
producing a respiratory alkalosis, with the carbon dioxide falling to around four
kilopascals.
The kidney compensates by excreting bicarbonate,
so the plasma bicarbonate falls correspondingly, and the pH is returned towards,
though it remains slightly above, normal — a compensated respiratory alkalosis.
This has consequences: the lowered carbon dioxide aids the transfer of carbon
dioxide from the fetus to the mother across the placenta;
and the reduced bicarbonate means a reduced buffering reserve,
so the pregnant woman tolerates a metabolic acidosis less well.
So pregnancy causes a compensated respiratory alkalosis:
progesterone increases ventilation, lowering the carbon dioxide,
with renal excretion of bicarbonate compensating and the pH near normal but
slightly raised; aiding fetal carbon-dioxide transfer but reducing the buffering
reserve — a normal adaptation important in interpreting the blood gases and
managing the acid-base balance of the pregnant patient.
Pull it together: why is acid-base balance so important in anaesthesia and critical
care?
I would close by drawing together why the acid-base balance is so central to
anaesthesia and critical care: because it both reflects the state of the patient
and itself affects the function of every system,
so that its monitoring and management are fundamental.
As a reflection, the acid-base state is a sensitive indicator of disturbance:
a metabolic acidosis with a raised lactate signals inadequate tissue perfusion or
oxygenation, guiding the recognition and resuscitation of shock;
a respiratory acidosis signals inadequate ventilation;
the patterns reveal the underlying disorder.
As a determinant, the pH affects the function of the body:
severe acidaemia depresses the myocardium and blunts the response to
catecholamines, threatening the circulation;
disturbances shift the oxygen dissociation curve,
affect the potassium and the ionised calcium, and alter the action of drugs.
The respiratory and renal systems defend the pH,
and the anaesthetist manipulates the respiratory component directly through
ventilation. The interpretation of the arterial blood gas,
applying the principles we have discussed, is therefore a constant tool.
So acid-base balance is central to anaesthesia and critical care both as a
sensitive reflection of the patient's state — signalling shock,
hypoperfusion and ventilatory failure — and as a determinant affecting the heart,
the circulation, oxygen delivery, electrolytes and drugs;
defended by the lungs and kidneys and manipulable through ventilation,
its monitoring by the blood gas being a fundamental tool — a fitting close to the
integrated physiology of respiration and its regulation.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. That concludes the station.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Hydrogen ion concentration is tightly regulated (it affects all
proteins/enzymes); normally ~40 nmol/L,
expressed as pH ~7.4 (range 7.35-7.45) — acidaemia below, alkalaemia above;
defended by buffers (seconds), the lungs (minutes) and the kidneys (hours-days).
Second, The bicarbonate buffer (carbonic acid/bicarbonate) is the chief
extracellular buffer and an 'open system' — CO2 regulated by lungs,
bicarbonate by kidneys.
Henderson-Hasselbalch (in words): pH = a constant + the log of the ratio of
bicarbonate to dissolved CO2 — so pH depends on the RATIO of (renal) bicarbonate to
(respiratory) CO2, not their absolute amounts.
Third, Buffers (instant): bicarbonate (dominant,
extracellular) and plasma proteins; haemoglobin and phosphate (red cells);
large intracellular/bone stores (slower);
all in equilibrium via the common H+ (isohydric principle).
The lungs regulate pH rapidly (minutes) via CO2/ventilation — powerful but limited;
the kidneys slowly (hours-days) by excreting fixed acid and adjusting bicarbonate —
the only route for non-volatile acid.
Fourth, Four primary disorders: respiratory acidosis (primary rise in CO2,
hypoventilation), respiratory alkalosis (primary fall in CO2, hyperventilation),
metabolic acidosis (primary fall in bicarbonate — added fixed acid or bicarbonate
loss), metabolic alkalosis (primary rise in bicarbonate — acid loss/bicarbonate
gain); each provokes compensation in the other component.
Fifth, The metabolic component is quantified by the standard bicarbonate and the
base excess (acid/base needed to normalise pH at normal CO2;
negative = base deficit/metabolic acidosis);
compensation (respiratory for metabolic disorders,
renal for respiratory) partially and predictably restores pH — deviation suggests a
mixed disorder; the anion gap classifies metabolic acidosis.
The chemoreceptor control of ventilation defends both the blood gases and the pH —
integrating breathing with acid-base balance.
Thank you. That concludes the station.